---
title: 'The gift my grandma gave me: 2022'
spanishTitle: 'Lo que mi abuela me regaló: 2022'
description: Just some of the awesome things I experienced this year!
date: '10 Nov. 2022'
spanishDate: '10 nov. 2022'
hidden: true
---

<Translator>
<English>

## Where to even begin?

I have a lot of thoughts to share about this year, so many that, now, as I type
this, I seem to have lost them all. Not sure if that resonates with any of
y'all, but sometimes I feel as if I have so much to say that I have nothing at
all. I have all these words, almost omnipresent, everywhere and all at once
flying thru my brain that I don't even know where to begin. They're everywhere
and nowhere, but I hope that I can piece them together in a way that makes sense
to others.

I apologize in advance because those that know me know I love to write, and this
may end up sucking you into a world of words that you probably didn't see
coming. My life changed a lot this year; sometimes in small, subtle ways that
took me a while to notice, and sometimes in large, unapologeticly loud waves,
that, though, I enjoyed, I did not see coming. So as much as this is meant to be
a way I share my life with my friends and family, it's also something I'm doing
for myself: to look back at and record all the ways my heart was filled this
year, to be thankful for the joy and the pain that have brought me to this
moment.

<br />

## Let's rewind a bit

I started sending out Christmas cards a few years ago because I always loved
receiving cards from my friends. When I was younger I thought it was something
only married people and families got to do because none of my single friends
ever sent any cards. I so couldn't wait for the time when I would finally be
able to send out Christmas cards (I'm not sure if it's just an American thing or
if other countries do it too). There were a lot of things that I so badly wanted
to do but always felt like I had to do them with a partner. Eventually, and
probably because an ex boyfriend broke up with me, I decided I no longer wanted
to wait to have a man in my life to do certain things. So I sent out the
Christmas cards and I started traveling and doing things for nobody other than
myself, and it was one of the best things I could've done.

Before 2021 even ended, I had already planned a lot of my trips for 2022. I had
an idea of what I wanted my year to be like, the things I wanted to do,
relationships I hoped to form, but I never imagined it would turn out quite like
it did. It feels like every year since 2020 has had that recurring theme: it's
never what we imagine. At the beginning of 2022 I remember all my friends
posting memes on Instagram begging the year to finally be better than the last
two. I also remember feeling cynical. After all the downs the world, myself
included, had experienced the previous two years, it was hard to find hope for
this year.

For those of you that don't know, I was named Josefina after my Abuela Josefina,
my dad's mom. My grandma lived her whole life in Guatemala, where my dad is
from. Though, my parents took me once to visit as a toddler, I don't remember
any of it. For all practical purposes, I have never been to Guatemala, and I
have never met my family there in person (except for one uncle who lived with us
when I was in elementary school). When Abuela Josefina died last year from
covid, I didn't expect for her death to hit me as hard as it did. I had spent
all my life only getting to know her through the other side of a phone, skype
calls and letters. The older I got, the less often we talked, something I regret
and wish I had appreciated more. Abuela Josefina was an enigma to me. She was
someone who was both a stranger and yet very significant to my life. She was the
past, the present, the future. It's something that's hard to explain to people
who haven't lived the same experiences as immigrants or children of immigrants.
Even my experience is completely different than my parents, and theirs
completely different than their parents, but there's a shared understanding of
the two worlds we hold in our hearts. For me, Abuela Josefina was a symbol of
everything I was, a reminder of everything I should be, where I truly come from
and the people who I live for. She was as much a part of me as the blood that
runs through my veins. She was a paradox. She was like a fairy tale, something
intangible and dreamy, because I hoped, I so badly hoped and dreamed and
imagined that one day I would go to Guatemala and be able to hug her in person,
I would be able to see her face to face, the woman who gave me my name and,
unknowingly, everything else about my life.

When she died, my heart broke and I couldn't understand why. Even know, as I
think about it over a year later, I barely understand it, how someone could feel
so close and yet so far away. Here's a woman I only ever knew from a distance,
and yet, it hurt to lose her. It was surreal at first, the thought that I
wouldn't be able to meet her anymore, the pain, the disbelief. Sometimes I
pretend she's still alive (not in a creepy, put her in a mental hospital kind of
way). Maybe a better way to phrase it is sometimes I feel like she's still
alive. Like if I never go to Guatemala, she will always be alive there, but if I
go, I have to accept that she is no longer there. I don't know if I'll ever
visit, but if I do, I know I will no longer get to see her, talk to her, touch
her, and I hate the universe for that.

I wish I could go back and change things. I wish I could go back and talk to her
more, call her more, write to her more. I wish I could go back and visit before
it was too late. I can't do any of those things. What I could do, was try not to
let it happen again with the rest of my family. Somehow, at some point last
year, I struck up a conversation with my mom about her family in Mexico, family
that I didn't know. I have always dreamed of living in Mexico City, where my mom
was born, and where my parents lived for a while after they married, but part of
me always felt like that was just a dream. After my grandma died, I had this
growing desire to go to Mexico for a while by myself to meet the family I didn't
know, and get to experience Mexico on my own terms. All through out my
childhood, we spent every summer going to Mexico, traveling through all parts of
the country by car. One year we even drove down from Austin to Cancún! I had
spent all my childhood visiting and experience Mexico with my parents and
siblings; I missed it, but I also wanted to make my own experiences as an adult.
I wanted to discover my own friendships and adventures, have my own
relationships with family, not through my parents but through my own accord. I
also wanted none of it, not because I didn't want it, but because it was scary.
It felt easier to say I would love to have this, but it's scary so actually...
just kidding!

One day, I shared some of my thoughts with my best friend, about wanting to
visit Mexico for a while, taking advantage of this perfect time in my life where
I don't have any relational committments, children, or a job tying me down to a
specific place (I've been working from home since the start of the pandemic),
and somehow I found the courage in me to plan my solo trip. I'm thankful for
that conversation, it gave me the boost of confidence I needed to plan something
that changed my life. So before the year even ended, I had booked an Airbnb for
2 months of the following year, and I began planning my visit.

<br />

## All these words and you haven't even gotten to 2022?

### Hold that thought

In case you hadn't realized, everything I wrote before was about 2021. I know,
it was a lot, but it's an important part of my story this year. However, I'm
gonna pause that story for a second, and begin with the first quarter of the
2022, before I went to Mexico.

</English>
<Spanish>

## Mi tradición anual

</Spanish>
</Translator>

> “i have laughed more than daffodils and cried more than June.” ― Sanober Khan

![Example description](/images/2022/jt2.JPG)

![Example description](/images/2022/hawaii.JPG)
